Rice is agreed upon as the staple food of the Philippines. However, data from the United States Department of Agriculture ([PUT YEAR HERE]) show that the Philippines is projected to remain the world's leading rice importer, with an estimated 3.8 million metric tons of rice imported in 2024 alone (Cabuenas, 2024). This can lead to increases in farmgate, wholesale, and retail prices (Gomez, 2024) that can lead to affordability issues for the general public. This is a problem when taking into account recent trends with income poverty. As a result, investments into potential alternatives such as adlay have been taken into consideration. Weng et al. (2022) shows the numerous health benefits of adlay, which include, but are not limited to, "anti-tumor, anti-bacterial, anti-inflammatory, analgesic, blood sugar-lowering, and blood lipid-lowering effects." Data from the food and Nutrition Research Institute (FNRI; [PUT YEAR HERE]) also reveal that adlay, on average, tends to give more energy in Kcal, protein, calcium, and iron than its competitors.

Investing into enhancing the types of soil on which adlay can be grown via amendments may address concerns of supply and demand while creating stable job opportunities for farmers in the Philippines. Such enhancements can potentially lead to easier local mass-production that can help alleviate the low supply of adlay at present, which in turn may contribute to balancing out the roughly the 3.8 million metric tons of rice imported by the country just last year (Cabuenas, 2024). The soil advancements that can assist adlay production and help turn it into a viable alternative to rice can also cut down on import costs and address the affordability issues faced by the public (Gomez, 2024).